``pylexa``
==========

*NOTE: This library is NOT ready for production use yet!*

``pylexa`` is a library that aims to ease development of an `Alexa
Skills
Kits <https://developer.amazon.com/public/solutions/alexa/alexa-skills-kit>`__.

``pylexa`` allows one to define a simple Flask application that will be
able to accept requests and return appropriate responses to the Alexa
service.

Example
-------

Let's say you want to define an Alexa Skill that echoes whatever the
user says. So far, you've:

-  created a skill in the `Amazon Developer
   Console <https://developer.amazon.com/edw/home.html#/skills/list>`__
-  Added a ``Echo`` intent with a single slot, ``message``:

   .. code:: javascript

       {
         "intent": "Echo",
         "slots": [
           {
             "name": "message",
             "type": "AMAZON.LITERAL"
           }
         ]
       }

-  Added an utterance to allow users to interact with the skill:

   ``Echo echo { something | message }``

Now, you're ready to create a server that will accept the request and
return a response echoing the input. Using ``pylexa``, we'd need only
the following code to accomplish this:

.. code:: python

    from flask import Flask

    from pylexa.app import alexa_blueprint
    from pylexa.intent import handle_intent
    from pylexa.response import AlexaResponseWrapper, PlainTextSpeech


    app = Flask(__name__)
    alexa_blueprint.app_id = 'my_app_id'
    app.register_blueprint(alexa_blueprint)
    app.response_class = AlexaResponseWrapper


    @handle_intent('Echo')
    def handle_echo_intent(request):
        return PlainTextSpeech(request.slots.get('message', 'Nothing to echo'))

And that's it! You can push the above code, configure the skill to point
to the server running the ``flask`` app and use the service simulator to
test your skill.

Testing
-------

After installing requirements with ``pip install -r requirements.pip``,
tests can be run with ``nosetests``.

Alexa Configuration
-------------------

Configuration of an Alexa Skill is done in three parts in the developer
console:

-  the intent schema
-  list of utterances
-  custom slot definitions

``pylexa`` comes with a command line tool that aims to simplify this
configuration by allowing one to define a YAML file with the necessary
information and generate the intent schema, utterances, and custom slots
from that.

For example, let's say you had the following YAML schema defined:

.. code:: yaml

    intents:
        - TestIntent:
            foo: AMAZON.NUMBER
            bar: CUSTOM_SLOT
        - OtherIntent
        - AMAZON.YesIntent

    utterances:
        TestIntent:
            - 'do something with {foo} and {bar}'
            - '{foo} {bar}'
        OtherIntent:
            - 'do something else'

    slots:
        CUSTOM_SLOT:
            - value 1
            - value 2

This defines a skill that handles three intents (``TestIntent``,
``OtherIntent``, and ``AMAZON.YesIntent``), specifies utterances for
``TestIntent`` and ``OtherIntent``, and contains a custom slot
definition.

If we have that YAML definition in ``conf/schema.yml``:

.. code:: bash

    $ tree conf
    conf
    └── schema.yml

    0 directories, 1 file

We can then run the command line tool ``generate-alexa-conf`` to create
the requisite files:

.. code:: bash

    $ generate-alexa-conf conf/schema.yml

We now have the intent schema, utterances, and slots defined in their
own files:

.. code:: bash

    $ tree conf
    conf
    ├── intent_schema.json
    ├── schema.yml
    ├── slots
    │   ├── CUSTOM_SLOT
    └── utterances.txt

    1 directory, 4 files

The contents of each file can then be copied + pasted in to the
appropriate sections of the Alexa Skill configuration.


