.\" Written by Daniel.
.
.TH "QingStor" "1" "May 03, 2016" "0.1" "Qsctl Reference"
.SH NAME
qsctl-mv
.
.nr rst2man-indent-level 0
.
.de1 rstReportMargin
\\$1 \\n[an-margin]
level \\n[rst2man-indent-level]
level margin: \\n[rst2man-indent\\n[rst2man-indent-level]]
-
\\n[rst2man-indent0]
\\n[rst2man-indent1]
\\n[rst2man-indent2]
..
.de1 INDENT
.\" .rstReportMargin pre:
. RS \\$1
. nr rst2man-indent\\n[rst2man-indent-level] \\n[an-margin]
. nr rst2man-indent-level +1
.\" .rstReportMargin post:
..
.de UNINDENT
. RE
.\" indent \\n[an-margin]
.\" old: \\n[rst2man-indent\\n[rst2man-indent-level]]
.nr rst2man-indent-level -1
.\" new: \\n[rst2man-indent\\n[rst2man-indent-level]]
.in \\n[rst2man-indent\\n[rst2man-indent-level]]u
..
.SH SYNOPSIS
.sp
.nf
qsctl mv
    <local-path> <qs-path> or <qs-path> <local-path>
    [\-\-force]
    [\-r, \-\-recursive]
    [\-\-exclude]
    [\-\-include]
.fi
.sp
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.sp
Move local file(s) to qingstor or qingstor key(s) to local\&. The first path
argument is the source and second the destination.
.sp
\fBmv\fP command will delete source files(keys) after transfering work done. If
you do not want to delete source files(keys), please use \fBcp\fP command.
.sp
When a key or file already exists at destination, program will ask to overwrite
or skip. You can use \fB--force\fP option to forcely overwrite.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.PP
\-\-force
.RS 4
Forcely overwrite existing key(file) without asking\&.
.RE
.PP
\-r, \-\-recursive
.RS 4
Recursively transfer keys(files)\&.
.RE
.PP
\-\-include
.RS 4
Exclude all keys or files that match the specified pattern\&.
.RE
.PP
\-\-exclude
.RS 4
Do not exclude keys or files that match the specified pattern\&.
.RE
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.sP
The following \fBmv\fP command moves a single file to bucket \fBmybucket\fP:
.INDENT 0.0
.INDENT 4
.sp
.nf
.ft C
$ qsctl mv test.txt qs://mybucket
.ft P
.fi
.UNINDENT
.UNINDENT
.sp
Output:
.INDENT 0.0
.INDENT 4
.sp
.nf
.ft C
Key <test.txt> created
File 'test.txt' deleted
.ft P
.fi
.UNINDENT
.UNINDENT
.sp
The following \fBmv\fP command moves all keys in bucket \fBmybucket\fP to local
directory:
.INDENT 0.0
.INDENT 4
.sp
.nf
.ft C
$ qsctl mv qs://mybucket test/ -r
.ft P
.fi
.UNINDENT
.UNINDENT
.sp
Output:
.INDENT 0.0
.INDENT 4
.sp
.nf
.ft C
File 'test/test1.txt' written
File 'test/test2.txt' written
File 'test/test3.jpg' written
Key <test/test1.txt> deleted
Key <test/test2.txt> deleted
Key <test/test3.jpg> deleted
.ft P
.fi
.UNINDENT
.UNINDENT
.sp
The following \fBmv\fP command with the \fB\-\-exclude\fP option will exclude
the keys match the pattern value \fB"*.txt"\fP:
.INDENT 0.0
.INDENT 4
.sp
.nf
.ft C
$ qsctl mv qs://mybucket test \-r --exclude "*.txt"
.ft P
.fi
.UNINDENT
.UNINDENT
.sp
Output:
.INDENT 0.0
.INDENT 4
.sp
.nf
.ft C
File 'test/test3.jpg' written
Key <test/test3.jpg> deleted
.ft P
.fi
.UNINDENT
.UNINDENT
.sp
The following \fBmv\fP command with the \fB\-\-exclude\fP and \fB\-\-include\fP
option will include the keys match the pattern value \fB"*.txt"\fP:
.INDENT 0.0
.INDENT 4
.sp
.nf
.ft C
$ qsctl mv qs://mybucket test \-r --exclude "*" --include "*.txt"
.ft P
.fi
.UNINDENT
.UNINDENT
.sp
Output:
.INDENT 0.0
.INDENT 4
.sp
.nf
.ft C
File 'test/test1.txt' written
File 'test/test2.txt' written
Key <test/test1.txt> deleted
Key <test/test2.txt> deleted
.ft P
.fi
.UNINDENT
.UNINDENT
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.sp
Report bugs to email <\fBdaniel@yunify\&.com\fR>\&.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.sp
\fBqsctl\fR(1), \fBqsctl-ls\fR(1), \fBqsctl-mb\fR(1), \fBqsctl-cp\fR(1),
\fBqsctl-rb\fR(1), \fBqsctl-rm\fR(1), \fBqsctl-sync\fR(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2016 Yunify Inc.
.\" Written by Daniel.
.
